3D Collision Without Triangles

---

Disclaimer: If you're interested in the math and code, the technical overview begins at (timestamp). Everything leading up is the story of 'why' I built this collision engine. Please enjoy.

Hi, I'm Twilight. I'm making a racing game called MaxX Throttle. It's inspired by F-ZERO GX, which I started playing shortly after Nintendo released F-ZERO 99. Despite never having been even slightly interested in a racing game before, the overwhelming chaos of F-ZERO 99 drew me in - I'd never seen an online multiplayer game with this many players ALL directly interacting with each other. Sure, in its Battle Royale mode, Fortnite has 100 players, but they start all spread out over a big island. You rarely ever 'felt' the scale of the lobbies.

I didn't have a Nintendo Switch, so I couldn't play it myself... but I became interested in the F-ZERO series. Brief tangent: I'm a huge fan of Super Monkey Ball, which was developed by Amusement Vision, a subsidiary of SEGA. You might know them by their current name, Ryu Ga Gotoku Studio - the developers of the Like a Dragon series, known in the west as Yakuza. What you might not know is that this studio also developed F-ZERO GX and F-ZERO AX, the GameCube and Arcade F-ZERO titles that released in 2003. So, I decided that my first foray into playing the series would be F-ZERO GX.

I fell in love with it almost immediately - it's mind bogglingly fast, has loads of advanced tech for dedicated players to master, and although you'd expect even at a fraction of its 99 player counterpart, 30 vehicles on the track has got to be excessively chaotic! But the lack of items or ranged weapons means you only ever have to worry about who's right next to you. I wanted to play it online, but being a GameCube game, my only option was delay based netplay via an emulator. If you're a fighting game aficionado, you probably know what I'm talking about. A laggy four player versus mode does not excite me. So, why not make my own game? I worked on a game called Rolled Out!, so I have some experience doing this sort of thing.

After messing around in Godot for a while, I'd built a pretty decent facsimile of the game's physics, with functioning online rollback. Racetracks were built in Blender, and I relied on Godot's built in raycasting for collision detection. But... it wasn't quite good enough. The engine's raycasting code, and Godot's native scripting language, GDScript, were both just too slow for what I needed. Even after months of optimization efforts, I was only ever able to manage between twelve and fifteen simultaneous racers on the track before hitting a performance ceiling. Any more players, and the game would slow down to a crawl.

Not good enough!!!

When I looked at the previous 3D game in the F-ZERO series, F-ZERO X, I was baffled. The Nintendo 64's CPU ran at a leisurely 93.75 MHz, and the machine only had four entire megabytes of RAM to work with. And it turns out the 30 simultaneous racers at a constant 60 frames per second was not a special upgrade for its sequel... even on this machine which struggled to pull more than 20 frames per second on many of its most beloved titles, F-ZERO X was a perfect 60 from start to finish, with 29 opponents on the track with you.

Now, you can't just rely on the numbers... there's way more to how 'fast' a computer is than how many megahertz it has. There's memory bandwidth, cache size and access times, and a dozen more factors at that. But if I were to ballpark, I'd say the Nintendo 64 is at least one thirtieth as fast as my PC. So if my code was as fast as theirs, I should have been able to simulate 30 cars 30 times at the bare minimum. My game could barely handle 1/4th that. So what gives?!

Well, it seemed obvious to me that it wasn't using triangles for its collision. The visible shape for F-ZERO X's cylinder sections is an octagon - an eight sided polygon. You can SEE the individual faces! Yet as the vehicle travels around the circumference, gravity shifts smoothly and seamlessly, and the vehicle remains equidistant from the center of the cylinder, as if it were a perfect circle.

If the game were using triangles for its collision, how was it so smooth? And how did it never drop below 60 fps?! Contemporary ray-triangle acceleration techniques like Bounding Volume Hierarchies, used for quickly testing collisions versus thousands of triangles, weren't commonly in use at the time in games, making the performance question even harder to answer.

I'd put in months of work to get my game feeling this smooth, and this game from 1998 was running circles around me on a dog-ass system with a RAM budget so tiny that several of its biggest releases *required* an accessory that was literally just more RAM.

What was it that this game had?

What was their secret sauce...?

Was it... splines?

[on screen: Spline
a smooth, mathematically defined curve constructed from connected polynomial segments, controlled by a set of "control points" that influence its shape.]

I mean, it would make sense. Splines seem great for this specific use case. The racetrack in F-ZERO X is a line that follows a path through space. The racetrack never branches, and it's super smooth. Compared to a triangle mesh, a spline takes up practically no space in memory at all, leading to fewer cache misses! Is this the answer?!

[black and white pause]

Now, before we dig into that question, we should address a few of the false assumptions we've been making. 

[transition]

An object's collision does not have to match what you see! You could create a low-detail visual model for rendering, and have a higher detail collision mesh... which seems a little funny to consider, since traditionally you would see the opposite in most games.

And it's not impossible to emulate a smooth collision surface using triangles. I did so in my godot clone game! One can easily store additional useful data about the mesh being collided with, such as the surface normal of each vertex. And when you perform a raycast in Godot, if that raycast hits a collision triangle, one of the variables returned in the collision data is the barycentric coordinate. It's a set of three values that represent the local coordinate of the hit on the triangle - in layman's terms, how 'close' the hit is to each of the triangle's vertices. You can use this to smoothly interpolate any data associated with these vertices, including our stored surface normal.

This is nice, but it's only one half of the puzzle. You can interpolate the surface normal, which grants a smooth appearance to the changing gravity. But the underlying shape of the surface hasn't changed. If the surface is fairly smooth, it looks and feels great! But the issue becomes apparent when we have an F-ZERO X style octagonal cylinder. For a true cylinder, the vehicle should be traveling in a perfect circle around the centerpoint of the segment. Yet, if we visualize the vehicle's trail as it travels the circumference, we can see that it's octagonal, like the underlying low poly mesh.

And here's where I blow your mind: this problem, too, can be fixed! During my research, I learned of a technique called PN Triangles. As I understand it, this technique is traditionally used for 3D rendering. A low poly mesh is tesselated, and the PN Triangles algorithm finds where to place the new vertices. It takes all of the data about a triangle (the vertex positions, normals, and a barycentric coordinate) and returns a point on a 'smoothed' surface.

So we have our track collision mesh, accelerated with a BVH, and we additionally store the smoothed vertex normals. When we find a collision, we get the barycentric coordinate, and we interpolate between the normals of each vertex of the triangle we hit, and then we run all the data through the PN Triangles algorithm to find a smoothed surface, and with the normal and surface point we create a virtual plane that then gets fed into the vehicle collision as the surface we ACTUALLY collide against!

[shows several cases of the vehicle glitching out like crazy against some slightly weird geometry]

Ah... ehh.... 

...you know, this seems like an awful lot of legwork just to 'fake' it. Especially when 'faking it' breaks down so easily. We're making so many assumptions about the data. We're extrapolating! We're creating information that isn't there. And, if we're careful, it works fine.

But 'fine'... isn't good enough!!

All of this extra math was required to achieve a result that I merely considered 'acceptable'. And to keep it performant enough to handle a mere 15 players online, I had to sacrifice practically everything else: the code which actually simulated the vehicle handling was less than a third of the total vehicle code. Acceleration, steering, strafing, combat with other racers... I had to keep simplifying and simplifying, because just the bare minimum three raycasts and additional math, necessary to handle collision, was taking up so much of my performance budget.

[Sigh...]

..you know, I was burying the lede earlier, when I was talking about F-ZERO X and splines. I already knew that it used some kind of spline for, at the very least, defining the racetrack path, even if not for the collision. The F-ZERO X Expansion Kit is an add-on disk for the Nintendo 64DD that adds a boatload of new features and content for F-ZERO X. One of those new features was a full track editor, allowing players to build their own racetracks for the game. In this editor, the racetrack paths are defined using splines. Even without the expansion kit, the base game has a special grand prix cup called the X cup, which features five new randomly generated tracks every time you play it. In every single racetrack, you can see the game generates the visuals in real time, based on the underlying spline. You can even find the data for the splines in memory and modify them to change the track while you're on it!

So, the game obviously doesn't store any kind of triangle data for the racetrack on the cartridge. Whatever it does, it does *at runtime*, using splines.

But for us, the solution isn't as straightforward as 'just use splines'. One of the things that's really nice about triangles is how rigorously defined and fast the math is for all sorts of useful information about a triangle. You can quickly correctly solve for the closest point, the distance to the triangle's plane, which side of the triangle a point is on, whether a line intersects with the triangle, the location of said intersection... and all of those things are super fast.

[A cubic bezier curve appears on screen]

Pictured in front of you is one of the most beloved curves, the cubic bezier curve. When it comes to creating splines, the cubic bezier reigns king!

Now, given an arbitrary point, can you solve for the closest point on the curve? Intuitively, it feels like it should be simple, right?

Well, it's fucking not.

The moment you try to do *anything* analytical with a cubic Bézier, the math spits in your eye. Want the closest point on the curve to some arbitrary 3D location? You wind up with a quintic polynomial—degree five... and there is no general closed-form solution for that. So you fall back to numerical root finding. Newton-Raphson, De Casteljau subdivision, interval halving - pick your poison. These methods converge on the correct answer, but they need good starting guesses, they can oscillate, and the more times you call them per frame, the more they chew through your perf budget. Even computing a normal vector is non-trivial, because the derivative collapses to zero at inflection points.

But obviously, F-ZERO X uses splines. So what the hell?

What did they see that I can't see?

"...well," I thought, "let's try and figure that out."

That being said, when it comes to reverse engineering, I'd only ever worked with GameCube games. Dolphin's debugging tools are far more mature than any Nintendo 64 emulator I could find, and I already had experience with screwing around with and modding several GameCube games, including F-ZERO GX. F-ZERO X had proven to me that a spline based approach was feasible, and that it could be FAST... but GX was an upgrade in every way. Terrain could freely bob and weave along the track surface. Flat roads could be vertically offset, creating dips and bumps which varied along the segment length. Any segment type could have its width and height change independent of each other, allowing cylindrical tracks to have an ellipsoid cross section.

If F-ZERO GX utilized splines for its racetracks, it was clearly much more sophisticated than its predecessor. And if I could learn how they work, I could implement it myself.

[footage of raphael's track editor]

What you're looking at is a track editor for F-ZERO GX, a part of a project called Manifold. It was created by Raphaël Tétreault, a professor at Mohawk College and technical game designer. I have no idea how long it would have taken me to figure everything out if it was not for his work. Since Raphaël had reverse engineered the F-ZERO GX scene and racetrack format, I was able to look at not just how racetracks are constructed, but the data that is exported, and which the game actually reads at runtime when a racetrack is loaded. It turned out that F-ZERO GX did indeed use splines for its racetrack collision! To demonstrate, here I'm using a tool called Dolphin Memory Engine to modify the track collision at runtime. The track visuals don't change, because unlike F-ZERO X, the visuals are precomputed and stored on the disk. But the collision changed! They WERE using splines for collision, just like F-ZERO X!

And best of all, I finally understood HOW they were able to use splines for collision. The track editor and its code had illuminated for me the piece I had been missing... the piece that would complete the puzzle:

[a cylinder appears overtop a part of a racetrack that the camera had been zooming in on accompanied with a ding]

This is a checkpoint.

It belongs to a racetrack segment.

It consists of two transformation matrices, sets of values which control the position, rotation, and size of the start and end of the checkpoint.

It also contains two time, or 't' values, indicating which portion of the segment the checkpoint covers.

[the camera begins to move along the racetrack, with the center line of the track staying in the center of the frame, and as the camera moves along the track, new cylinders appear representing the checkpoint of the current centerline position on the track, and old cylinders disappear]

All along the racetrack, these checkpoints approximate the track's shape over the entire spline. But crucially, the checkpoints themselves are not the collision... their purpose is to convert a position in 3D space into a coordinate on the spline.

Honestly, I'm surprised I didn't think of anything like this. In the version of my game that I showed in the beginning of the video, I'd actually come up with a similar system, but I was only using it to track how far along in a lap a player was. I'd been so hung up on the limitations of triangles and my perception of the 'perfection' of splines, I hadn't considered the possibility that even an approximate solution for a spline would still be superior to anything I'd tried before. The challenge of finding the correct place on a spline to collide with had been turned into just a bit of simple linear algebra.

At this point, I was in deep. I didn't even care anymore if it would be faster or slower. I was fascinated by the idea of coding this, so over the next few days I began to put together a prototype in GDScript.

It came together faster than I expected, honestly. With godot's built in interface, I made my first racetrack in this new spline based system, keyframe by keyframe. Inputting positions and rotations and scales by hand, generating its mesh, and previewing the result. During the process, I even ended up building some super basic tooling, to make the process a little less painful.

And before long...

[footage of the first car]

...it worked!

And more importantly... it was fast. Despite being ENTIRELY in GDScript, an interpreted language, simulating the car with this new collision technique took about thirty microseconds - ten microseconds faster than simulating the car tick in the old version of the game. That might not sound terribly impressive, but consider that the most expensive part of the simulation in the old version was raycasting, which is done almost entirely in the C++ side of the engine! The slowest part of my old code wasn't even MY code - it was Godot. And I hadn't even begun optimization yet; the code was checking every single segment, every single checkpoint! It was literally doing dozens of times more work than it needed to, and it was STILL that much faster!

I knew what I had to do next. With a functioning prototype in hand and a full understanding of how to implement everything, I began my foray...

...into C++.

[immediately showing it working]

...OK, it wasn't very arduous. I already knew exactly how to implement everything, so it was just a matter of learning GDExtension, so I could use a C++ module in Godot.

That being said, once the code was written, and I had done some basic optimization work to cut out, the results were... amazing.

[footage of thousands of cars]

Five thousand cars in eight milliseconds. Each car took under two microseconds to simulate - a twentyfold improvement from the old version of the game.
Most programmers can only dream of realizing performance gains like that.

And once I had re-implemented online rollback multiplayer, the fruits of my effort were quite apparent, even with just local testing. Running fourty eight fake clients and two real ones, I simulated the worst network conditions I could anticipate occurring in real gameplay - 250 milliseconds of latency, with huge amounts of packet loss and duplication. Yet, it continued running at full speed, with nary a hiccup. And it held up in practice! I ran a playtest with 17 players, several of which lived on near about the opposite side of the planet. With latencies over 200 milliseconds, all players experienced no slowdown, and no stutter.

[multiplayer footage]

It just worked.

...well, that's the end of the story. I'm sure you found it all very exciting, but I imagine some amount of you clicked on this video to hear about the specifics of my fancy collision engine, rather than the tale of why I made it. I talked a little bit about the technical details earlier, but let's go over the nitty gritty! In the meantime, if you're interested in trying the game out and racing online with us, you can download an early alpha build in the game's Discord server, which is linked in the description. I try to schedule playtests for new tracks and features fairly often, so the public build is pretty much always up-to-date.

OK! Let's talk code!

---

**SECTION 2**

Every track segment is driven by a `RoadTransformCurve`. It stores the segment’s centreline as a cubic Hermite spline – sixteen floats per keyframe for position, three basis vectors, and scale. That's only fifteen curves, so for memory alignment, I add an extra empty curve. The handles of each keyframe are linearized along the X axis, so we only need to store one float to represent the y position of each handle. During loading I call `RoadTransformCurve::precompute`, which walks through the keyframes and bakes the polynomial coefficients. At runtime `curve_matrix->sample()` evaluates the cubic using SIMD instructions. SIMD stands for Single Instruction, Multiple Data. They're special instructions which can perform an operation on many numbers simultaneously. This is great for our use case, where we have 16 numbers we want to do all of the exact same operations with - since curve sampling is the hottest part of our code, this one usage of SIMD instructions alone provides huge performance gains.

The result is that I can ask for the transform of the curve at any time `t` from 0 to 1, and I get a 3D transform for that exact point on the given segment.

The second half of the road definition is the cross-section. Each `TrackSegment` owns a `RoadShape` subclass. There are flavours for flat roads, cylinders and pipes, rounded rectangles, and 'open' variants of most of the above. They all share the same contract: given `(x, y)` in the range `[-1…1] × [0…1]`, return the world-space point on the surface.

Each shape evaluates a small set of curves:

- `RoadModulation` can vary the height of the track using two splines: one along the width of the segment, and one across the length. The width curve modifies the cross section, while the length curve controls the strength of the width curve. If the length curve goes negative, the cross section shape is inverted.
- `RoundedRect` has three additional curves which control the width, height, and radius of the rounded corners.
- Open shapes read an `openness` curve which controls how large the split is. This can be used to create half pipe shapes, or combined with the Y scale, transition into cylinders and pipes to and from flat roads.
- The seam where the shape is split by the openness curve has another curve which controls where along the width the split lies, which lets me do some really wild stuff, especially with the open rounded rectangle.

To make collision queries fast, the road is partitioned into `CollisionCheckpoint` volumes. Each checkpoint stores:

- Two planes that cap its ends.
- The 't', or 'time' value along the length of the segment that the checkpoint belongs to.
- Interpolated orientation bases at the start and end.
- Elliptical radii describing how far the surface extends east-west and up-down.
- A list of direct neighbour indices for quick traversal

When I need to know where a vehicle lies on the track, a method called `RaceTrack::get_best_checkpoint` walks through candidate checkpoints. It projects the query point between the checkpoint’s start and end planes, interpolates the basis, and turns that into a local coordinate `spatial_t`.

A nice bonus is that these checkpoints can also be used to track a player's lap progress, so the player leaderboard/placements are trivial to calculate. And since we have detailed information about each racer's position and orientation relative to the track, we can do other cool stuff like show a properly positioned arrow at the bottom of your screen that shows not just when, but WHERE a racer is approaching from behind by comparing lateral positions on the road.

The actual collision is a little tricky to explain, because the track is sampled in several places within the vehicle's physics code, and it's done a little differently in each place. But one of the most important functions is `road_shape->get_oriented_transform_at_time`. This function takes an input 2D vector which is the coordinate along the width and length of the road we want to sample at.

Since we only get a single 3d point in space when we sample the track, this function uses a technique called Finite Difference - by nudging this coordinate slightly to the right and forward along the track surface, we can compute tangent and normal vectors. It then packs a transform with the position, and the correct up, forward, and lateral vectors. In a perfect world, I'd like to be able to calculate these vectors directly using first derivatives, but I honestly don't know if that's even possible.

Anyways, we can treat the position and up axes as a plane, for collisions with the road. Since we also receive the centerpoint and scale of the road, we can detect rail collisions by computing a rail normal from the cross product between the up and forward vectors, and offsetting our imaginary plane by the horizontal scale.

Because collisions return a normalized coordinate along the width and length of the track, special terrain can also be driven with bezier curves. `RoadEmbed` lets me say “between 25% and 40% of this segment, and between these left/right boundaries, mark the surface as lava or a recharge strip.” During collision I just sample those curves and flip a terrain bitmask.

And when I need volume triggers — dash pads, jump plates, mines — the trigger colliders reuse the checkpoint neighbourhood graph. The car already knows what checkpoint it lies in, so checking these triggers is also extremely cheap.

Since the collision and level data are all completely custom built and proprietary, there's no existing toolchain to create levels... so I had to make my own. I decided to use Blender since it already comes with a fully mature interface and controls that I'm familiar with. I don't need to code my own gizmos, undo-redo system, or user interface.

The plugin creates empties as helpers, which stores information for each property as keyframe data. Terrain, modulations, seam rotation - all of these road properties are just curves you can edit directly in the graph editor. Upon exporting, the plugin topologically orders every connected segment, bakes the checkpoint neighbours, and writes out the final binary blob that the game expects. No additional steps are necessary to get a racetrack ingame, so iteration and playtesting is quick and painless.

The interface is messy, and not exactly 'production ready', but since I built it from the ground up to work exactly how I wanted it to, it makes the process of designing racetracks incredibly fast for me. One of my big goals for this project is to build a track editor directly into the game, but who knows when I'll get around to that?? There's so much more work left to be done elsewhere, still...

Well, we'll get there when we get there.

Thanks for watchin'.